so this is one of those Advanced topics
that you're probably going to come
across as you learn more about software
architecture it's pretty interesting so
multi-tenancy or multi-tenant
applications what exactly do we mean by
this word well if we look at this
diagram that I have here we see that we
are having three different tenants
tenant a b and c and what a tenant is in
this case is basically an organization
let's say a company that's trying to use
another company in this case it can
actually be slack and tenants can be
different companies like organizations
maybe your company that you're working
at and if your company is using slack
then your company is an is a tenant and
this probably one of these users are you
every tenant is probably going to have
users not necessarily but most of the
times they're also going to have users
so what is interesting in this diagram
is that all three tenants are using the
same slack backend all right let's call
it an application backend and of course
it's serving the static HTML and all the
API are there and they're not
necessarily running on the same Hardware
because nowadays we have such
distributed systems but the same back
end is basically being used the same set
of apis now these tenants are actually
very much separated from each other
which means even though they're using
the same API literally the same endpoint
the same back end they cannot access
each other's data right there's a
logical separation which is great okay
and this is what we mean by
multi-tenancy basically separation of
data and configurations for each tenant
I'm going to talk about advantages and
disadvantages just in a second to better
understand if you want such a
multitenant system or maybe you want
actually a single tenant system where
every tenant is not only going to have
its own API or dedicated back end but
it's also going to have its own database
all right in this case we're probably
going to have a shared database as well
not necessarily we're going to come to
databases but in this case you're
literally installing an application for
every tenant what's the what's an
example for in this case let's say an
sap sap is an Erp system basically it's
has to be dedicated like it literally
has to run on the customer's local
services something like that which means
we have to dedicate this application per
tenant and they have to manage their own
service on their own this is called a
single tenant like these tenants are
literally have no interconnection in
this case we do have some
interconnection okay so multi-tenant
versus single tenant now you get the
idea let's talk about some of these
aspects so for a multitenancy we're
we're going to need a tenant aware logic
in the application which means this back
end literally has to be able to
differentiate between the tenants can be
tokens Can Be roles whatever do we have
to do that also um tenant based feature
flagging maybe one of the tenants has
some access or has some features and
another one doesn't we'll also have to
care about data isolation how are we
going to make sure that tenant C cannot
access the data from 10p even if they're
talking to the same API another
challenge right also compliance how do
we make sure that the data is secure and
not transparent to everyone if we're
talking about gdpr and authentication
and authorization again maybe we can use
a ro based access control I also have a
video on that go check it out if you
want to know about airb I and we're also
going to talk about performance what are
the implications like in this case
you're literally going to give the
customer whatever the customer needs
you're going to tell them you need 32
gigs of RAM this kind of CPU if you have
it you can use the application just pay
me the money but in this case what if
the tenant a is using your application
more than tenant B does it mean tenant a
has more Privileges and can utilize your
CPU more well that's an interesting
topic that we're going to discover in
probably 5 minutes okay so when we talk
about data and the API all these aspects
that we just mentioned before there are
three different ways you can handle this
problem this diagram these three
diagrams are going to talk about 1 2 3
basically all the six issues that we
just mentioned so the first way to
handle it is actually having a shared
database so tenant a tenant B and tenant
C are going to talk to the same back end
and the same database and every database
table is going to have this column
called tenant ID which means tenant A's
record is going to be here let's say
there have their Channel ID which is XY
then tenant B is also going to be here
another Channel ID X2 whatever and then
tenant a again because they're going to
have probably not only one channel but
some something more let's say o5 and as
you can see each tenant record is still
in the same table okay we're literally
sharing okay let's talk about the
implications the pros are it's very easy
to store the data you literally just
need one database and one table to store
all of your tenants easier to scale
horizontally sure you can do charting if
needed and just add more CPU so you can
scale vertically and horizontally at the
same time and it's much easier to deploy
we literally need to deploy one database
and migrate and and all of that and back
up only one database now the cons are
that um data is isolation risk you
really have to make sure that tenant a
whenever you're making database query
doesn't accidentally fish the data for
the tenant b as well also backham
restoring per database not per tenant
meaning if for some reason your database
is gone your data for all of the tenants
are gone not only one tenant and
performance because if one tenant if
single tenant is too demanding then it's
probably going to drag other ten tenants
down as well now let's talk about data
isolation first so we have two points
here for in order to work around the
data isolation topic we can Implement a
rooll level security what is a role
level security well I'm not sure about
all the databases but post at least
provides this thing called Ro level
security let me know in the comments
below if there are any other databases
that already can do this I'm sure there
are but procress was probably the first
one that implemented this it basically
gives you an ability to put some
constraints on certain um columns so for
example let's say we're going to add a
variable for example this tenant and
we're going to alter the table called
orders and we're going to enable Ro
level security all right and then we can
create policy called for example tenant
isolation policy on the same table that
we just created or altered and we're
going to make sure that the tenant ID is
always equal to the tenant ID that we
defined above so the different tenant
cannot do this only the tened that only
T 1 12 3 can alter or do some updates on
this table all right this is something
called role level security you can read
more about it I'll put the links in the
description and a second point also
about data isolation and scoping is
probably called charting also related to
scaling by the way this is how you can
horizontally scale your databases let's
say we have an original table Alice Bob
carry and David David and we have two
four entries here if you do vertical
charts you can split this data by
columns here but for multi tendency
probably it makes sense to SC um split
them or Shard them horizontally instead
which means customer one and two are
always going to be in the first Shard
customer three and four are data or
tenant data is always going to be in the
third and in the second chart all right
so this is basically it now how do we
combat the performance issues this
performance issue that we're talking
about where one single performance one
one tenants actions are affecting
another 10 actions like you see in this
one let's say tenant a is actually I
call it performance but it's basically
utilizing more than half of the CPU
power let's say and tenant B and tenant
C barely get any power to work with Okay
that's why their application becomes
slow and the API responses are very very
slow this is called noise neighbors
because we're literally are having a
noise neighbor here called tenant a that
doesn't let let tenant B and tenant C
function properly how do we fix that
it's a great question well first of all
we can try preventing long running
queries on the database let's say we
make sure that every database statement
doesn't take them more more than 2
seconds now you can debate whether 2
seconds is too much or too little in
some cases actually very very little so
just keep it in mind that you can
actually set this timeout another thing
is using tenant user based rate limiting
if you're using engine X as a proxy you
can easily put a a tenant based rate
limiting here so let's say only 10
requests per user within 10 seconds okay
also you can prioritize certain tenants
if you're using RQ or Kafka or some kind
of a queuing system you can actually put
your logic within the cues and check for
a specific tenant and if this is not the
tenant that you want if this tenant does
not have the premium access or whatever
you can actually throttle some of the
computation also we can do per tenant
pooling meaning every time we get a
database connection we can limit the
pool size and we also have a bulkhead
pattern what is a bulkhead pattern well
it's one of the patterns also called
cell-based architecture but I'm going to
save it for the next video so if you're
curious about learning these kind of
architectural topics from my videos make
sure to subscribe and like this video so
that YouTube shows it to you again all
right now let's go back to the board and
talk about the second way of splitting
your data when it comes to multitenant
environments so the first one is a
shared database the second one is a
again one database but in this case
different schemas so schema a is going
to be for uh tenant a schema B is going
to be for tenant B there can be schema C
and the thing is they all have the same
structure meaning the same tables same
operations same same procedures and so
on but they are just scoped or in other
words namespace meaning of course they
can actually access each other's data
but you're again going to uh you can
still do ro based Access Control control
you can still Ro based Access Control
you can also make sure that the tenants
are not accessing each other so you can
Al still have constraints but at least
you're going to have some name name
spacing funny thing is schemas mean
different thing in for for different
databases so for example for SQL server
and postgress these are the schemas so
we have one database different schemas
this is exactly what we talked about for
Oracle myql and and for SQL s you get a
default schema for Oracle my SQL
actually it works different so I think
Oracle and MySQL store different schemas
in different databases which is a
completely different way of thinking
about it right so let's talk about the
pron PR so stronger data isolation
because we have different schemas and
each tenant has its own schema easier
pre- tenant backup you can literally
backup and restore a single schema not
all of them and better customization
maybe you can customize one schema okay
the cons are that now you have to manage
those schemas for example migrations
need to be applied to to multiple
schemas when there's dependency between
schemas this again can become a bit
conversome so probably better to avoid
that also a performance issue due to
schema count limitation okay what's a
schema count limitation it's basically a
number of schemas that you can have
because the more schemas you have the
slower your database probably going to
get or your requests are going to get um
finally enough for pogress there's no
hard limit but the performance is going
to suffer for my SQL so there's actually
no limitation but it's the performance
is going to suffer again and for for SQL
Server there's no hard limit but
metadata queries and indexing slows down
so summary this kind of idea sharing the
tenants by schemas in the database is
good for multi-tenant applications with
regular requirements and if you want per
tenant customization otherwise if you're
a small and medium Sask application or a
company you can also go with a single
database if you want more isolation due
to regulations and so on you can go for
different schemas now let's talk about
the last way this is almost going into
the single tenant Direction but we still
have the same backend of course you can
also say I'm going to make only single
back end per tenant a and single backend
for backend application for for tenant B
and so on you can still isolate but then
you're literally coming into this
territory for single tenant applications
so in this case we're going to say we
have three different databases but still
one API so what is it going to look like
in this case so we have database a
database B oh I did my color change I'm
going to change it to green and database
C okay each holding data only for
different tenants now let's talk about
the pr maximum data isolation and
security so the data in these databases
are not going to get mixed up unless you
try really hard and mess your API um
also no cross 10 performance issue
there's no nosy neighbors anymore
because these are running on different
instances most likely and these are just
different databases okay also easier to
provide tenant specific scaling let's
say tenant C is bigger than two other
tenants you can make the database on
tenant C twice as big when it comes to
resources okay the cons are that it's
much more expensive are you literally
going to spin up a new database for
every tenant does slack have to create a
separate database for every organization
maybe for example if it makes sense if
these users are really precious and
maybe it's a government that use the
slack maybe it makes sense to create a
separate database for this government
also different different difficult to
manage you have to have you have to
basically put a lot of time into
migrating different databases when it
comes to support so all in all good for
Enterprises government clients and
regulated Industries now I still want
you to not forget where is it a single
tenant approach because what can be a
use case for a single single tenant
approach not only ASP but even GitHub
Enterprise okay GitHub Enterprise or
let's say Azure Enterprise you know
these cloud services that can be
deployed for a specific company let's
say your company on premise even as on
your local servers if you want complete
isolation from internet you can still
have a git on your local machines then
you buy GitHub Enterprise and GitHub
Enterprise is exactly a single tenant
application because it's going to have
your own database no one else can talk
to your API that you're using all right
guys I hope you learned something new if
you did Smash like and I will see you
guys in the next one don't forget to
subscribe of course and all the best
goodbye